# An Analysis Of The Economic and Ethical Price Of Government Healthcare Systems

### Introduction
In western society there are typically two approaches to healthcare policy, private systems or public systems. In this essay I will analyze the economic and ethical paradoxes inherent to each system and make the case that all government healthcare policy, regardless of how altruistic and compassionate it purports to be, is intrinsically immoral and unethical.

### Initial clarifications
In order to obfuscate the failures of the democratic legislative system, government, the media and academia routinely collaborate to re-define terms, 1984-style, to make it difficult for the unenlightened public to understand objective reality and to make discussion and discovery of solutions impossible. Relevant examples of this are; the redefinition of the word “vaccine” to include RNA gene therapy. The redefinition of the word “recession” so government officials can claim the economy is stable. Broader examples are: The redefinition of the word “interrogation” to allow for the torture of political prisoners held in US custody. The redefinition of “firearm parts” to allow the enforcement of unconstitutional gun legislation.  

The contemporary definitions for “public” and “private” healthcare systems are not synonymous with true “socialized” or “free-market” systems respectively. Because of this, throughout this essay I will continue to refer to the two systems as “public” and “private” while acknowledging that the two systems have absolutely nothing in-common with their namesake.

### Public Systems
The British National Health Service (NHS) is widely regarded as the gold-standard for a public healthcare system. From cradle to grave the NHS provides unlimited free healthcare for its citizens at no cost. Its citizens are heavily taxed to fund this system, due to government monopolization, and the resulting removal of profit incentive the concept of “efficiency” simply does not exist, because of this, high amounts of waste and inefficiency exist throughout this system. Because the NHS’s budget is fixed and the demand for the service is variable NHS staff, especially its Jr. Drs and nurses have to bear the burden of this poorly designed system. Which manifests in long shifts, understaffed facilities, pay not increasing with inflation and poor working conditions.

Corrupt and inept politicians pledge to “Pay NHS staff fairly”, but fair pay is set by the market, not employers. Because of this fair pay will never be achieved until theres economic incentive to do so, these economic incentives can only come about when there is at least 2 employers competing to attract employees. This means that, fair pay, however this is subjectively defined, can never be achieved in a single employer industry. This is because, monopoly dynamics come into play where the single actor can arbitrarily set prices, in this case, the hourly price of highly specialized labour.

### Private Systems
The “private” healthcare system in the United States is popularly regarded as the poster-child private healthcare system. While it’s true this system is heavily “privatized”, the American healthcare system has a generous welfare system medicare medicaid which totals to well over $3.2bn. Because of this, the US healthcare system can in no way be considers a true ”private healthcare system” due to the fact that much of its activity is socially funded. Herein lies the core issue with the US healthcare system. It’s branded as a free-market system but in fact its heavily socialized and regulated which increases costs to the paying consumers, prevents the opening of new medical facilities and limits medical innovation (Examples, FDA’s approval process for new medical procedures, new medical equipment and new pharmaceutical drugs).

### Medical licensing
Medical licensing is the most heinous practice in modern healthcare. It is immoral for the government to arbitrarily decide who can and cannot practice medicine. According to Johns Hopkins Hospital in the US 250,000 people die every year due to medical malpractice. Medical malpractice is the third leading cause of death in the U.S. This proves that medical licensing is not effective at preventing doctors from killing their patients on the operating table. It is fact of economics that prices are a result of supply demand dynamics. When the supply of doctors is artificially limited by a government medical licensing body the hourly price of a doctors time will have to increase to price out the excess demand.

In a true private healthcare system, citizens should be free to receive medical care from whomever they want. No artificial barriers to entry should exist to artificially limit who can and can not provide medical care. 

### Drug Prohibition
All laws restricting access to pharmaceutical or recreational drugs are immoral and unethical. Consider opiate drugs, more people die of opiate overdoses in today’s United States than when heroin was widely available to be purchased over the counter. It is a fact of human society that, if enough people want a product, it will be produced, distributed and sold, no amount of draconian punishments can ever prevent this. Relevant examples of this are; early Christians dissemination of the Bible regardless of the threat of being brutally tortured and executed by the Romans, the distribution of western literature and pop-music throughout the Soviet Union regardless of the threat of being sent to a gulag and the $100Bn US illegal drug industry regardless of multi-decade prison sentences. This observation single-handedly eviscerates all arguments supporting drug prohibition laws. 

To fully appreciate this, consider the counter-argument. Anyone who supports legislation controlling the supply of pharmaceutical or recreational drugs is taking the following position: “While acknowledging that the half-century $1Tr War on Drugs has not meaningfully impacted the prevalence of drugs in our society and arguably has made the situation far worse (Examples: analog drugs, domestic gang violence, international cartel violence, destruction of minority families by mass-incarceration of fathers). These social drawbacks and financial costs are preferable than it is to allow free individuals to choose what substances they consume.”

The hideousness of this position is manifest and requires no further discussion.

### Regulation
All government regulation results in economic inefficiency. The resting place of all economic inefficiency is consumer prices. Therefore, all government healthcare regulation will always result in higher prices for patients. Furthermore, any price increase will inevitably price-out someone from being able to afford that product or service. Observing this, it can be reasoned that all healthcare legislation is immoral, because healthcare regulation will always result in increased prices and reduced access for patients. 

### Conclusion
Access to quality and affordable healthcare can never be achieved through the democratic legislative process, there is simply no politically-viable solution to resolve this problem. Slime-ball politicians tout their proposed legislation as a silver bullet to reduce the cost of routine medical procedures or to stop little Timmy picking up a doobie. But economies are far too complex for any human to meaningfully influence without having catastrophic unintended and unpredictable side-effects. Only when individuals are allowed to freely-pursue their own self-interests can a functioning and ethically-sound healthcare system be implemented. The only strategy to achieve quality and affordable healthcare is complete de-regulation of the healthcare industry.
